README.md, before:

<p align="center">
    <img src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/188c42f8-d249-4a72-b27a-e2b4f10a00a8" alt="Bitchat Android Logo" width="480">
</p>

> [!WARNING]
> This software has not received external security review and may contain vulnerabilities and may not necessarily meet its stated security goals. Do not use it for sensitive use cases, and do not rely on its security until it has been reviewed. Work in progress.

# bitchat for Android

A secure, decentralized, peer-to-peer messaging app that works over Bluetooth mesh networks. No internet required for mesh chats, no servers, no phone numbers - just pure encrypted communication. Bitchat also supports geohash channels, which use an internet connection to connect you with others in your geographic area.

This is the **Android port** of the original [bitchat iOS app](https://github.com/jackjackbits/bitchat), maintaining 100% protocol compatibility for cross-platform communication.

## Install bitchat

You can download the latest version of bitchat for Android from the [GitHub Releases page](https://github.com/permissionlesstech/bitchat-android/releases).

Or you can:

[<img alt="Get it on Google Play" height="60" src="https://play.google.com/intl/en_us/badges/static/images/badges/en_badge_web_generic.png"/>](https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=com.bitchat.droid)

**Instructions:**

1.  **Download the APK:** On your Android device, navigate to the link above and download the latest `.apk` file. Open it.
2.  **Allow Unknown Sources:** On some devices, before you can install the APK, you may need to enable "Install from unknown sources" in your device's settings. This is typically found under **Settings > Security** or **Settings > Apps & notifications > Special app access**.
3.  **Install:** Open the downloaded `.apk` file to begin the installation.

## License

This project is released into the public domain. See the [LICENSE](LICENSE.md) file for details.

## 📖 User Guides

New to Gap Mesh? Start here:

- 🇺🇸 **[English User Guide](docs/USER_GUIDE_EN.md)** – Complete guide for beginners
- 🇮🇷 **[راهنمای فارسی](docs/USER_GUIDE_FA.md)** – راهنمای کامل به زبان فارسی

## Features

- **✅ Cross-Platform Compatible**: Full protocol compatibility with iOS bitchat
- **✅ Decentralized Mesh Network**: Automatic peer discovery and multi-hop message relay over Bluetooth LE
- **✅ End-to-End Encryption**: X25519 key exchange + AES-256-GCM for private messages
- **✅ Channel-Based Chats**: Topic-based group messaging with optional password protection
- **✅ Store & Forward**: Messages cached for offline peers and delivered when they reconnect
- **✅ Privacy First**: No accounts, no phone numbers, no persistent identifiers
- **✅ IRC-Style Commands**: Familiar `/join`, `/msg`, `/who` style interface
- **✅ Message Retention**: Optional channel-wide message saving controlled by channel owners
- **✅ Emergency Wipe**: Triple-tap logo to instantly clear all data
- **✅ Modern Android UI**: Jetpack Compose with Material Design 3
- **✅ Dark/Light Themes**: Terminal-inspired aesthetic matching iOS version
- **✅ Battery Optimization**: Adaptive scanning and power management

## Android Setup

### Prerequisites

- **Android Studio**: Arctic Fox (2020.3.1) or newer
- **Android SDK**: API level 26 (Android 8.0) or higher
- **Kotlin**: 1.8.0 or newer
- **Gradle**: 7.0 or newer

### Build Instructions

1. **Clone the repository:**

   ```bash
   git clone https://github.com/permissionlesstech/bitchat-android.git
   cd bitchat-android
   ```

2. **Open in Android Studio:**

   ```bash
   # Open Android Studio and select "Open an Existing Project"
   # Navigate to the bitchat-android directory
   ```

3. **Build the project:**

   ```bash
   ./gradlew build
   ```

4. **Install on device:**
   ```bash
   ./gradlew installDebug
   ```

### Development Build

For development builds with debugging enabled:

```bash
./gradlew assembleDebug
adb install -r app/build/outputs/apk/debug/app-debug.apk
```

### Release Build

For production releases:

```bash
./gradlew assembleRelease
```

## Android-Specific Requirements

### Permissions

The app requires the following permissions (automatically requested):

- **Bluetooth**: Core BLE functionality
- **Location**: Required for BLE scanning on Android
- **Network**: Expand your mesh through public internet relays
- **Notifications**: Message alerts and background updates

### Hardware Requirements

- **Bluetooth LE (BLE)**: Required for mesh networking
- **Android 8.0+**: API level 26 minimum
- **RAM**: 2GB recommended for optimal performance

## Usage

### Basic Commands

- `/j #channel` - Join or create a channel
- `/m @name message` - Send a private message
- `/w` - List online users
- `/channels` - Show all discovered channels
- `/block @name` - Block a peer from messaging you
- `/block` - List all blocked peers
- `/unblock @name` - Unblock a peer
- `/clear` - Clear chat messages
- `/pass [password]` - Set/change channel password (owner only)
- `/transfer @name` - Transfer channel ownership
- `/save` - Toggle message retention for channel (owner only)

### Getting Started

1. **Install the app** on your Android device (requires Android 8.0+)
2. **Grant permissions** for Bluetooth and location when prompted
3. **Launch bitchat** - it will auto-start mesh networking
4. **Set your nickname** or use the auto-generated one
5. **Connect automatically** to nearby iOS and Android bitchat users
6. **Join a channel** with `/j #general` or start chatting in public
7. **Messages relay** through the mesh network to reach distant peers

### Android UI Features

- **Jetpack Compose UI**: Modern Material Design 3 interface
- **Dark/Light Themes**: Terminal-inspired aesthetic matching iOS
- **Haptic Feedback**: Vibrations for interactions and notifications
- **Adaptive Layout**: Optimized for various Android screen sizes
- **Message Status**: Real-time delivery and read receipts
- **RSSI Indicators**: Signal strength colors for each peer

### Channel Features

- **Password Protection**: Channel owners can set passwords with `/pass`
- **Message Retention**: Owners can enable mandatory message saving with `/save`
- **@ Mentions**: Use `@nickname` to mention users (with autocomplete)
- **Ownership Transfer**: Pass control to trusted users with `/transfer`

## Security & Privacy

### Encryption

- **Private Messages**: X25519 key exchange + AES-256-GCM encryption
- **Channel Messages**: Argon2id password derivation + AES-256-GCM
- **Digital Signatures**: Ed25519 for message authenticity
- **Forward Secrecy**: New key pairs generated each session

### Privacy Features

- **No Registration**: No accounts, emails, or phone numbers required
- **Ephemeral by Default**: Messages exist only in device memory
- **Cover Traffic**: Random delays and dummy messages prevent traffic analysis
- **Emergency Wipe**: Triple-tap logo to instantly clear all data
- **Bundled Tor Support**: Built-in Tor network integration for enhanced privacy when internet connectivity is available

## Performance & Efficiency

### Message Compression

- **LZ4 Compression**: Automatic compression for messages >100 bytes
- **30-70% bandwidth savings** on typical text messages
- **Smart compression**: Skips already-compressed data

### Battery Optimization

- **Adaptive Power Modes**: Automatically adjusts based on battery level
  - Performance mode: Full features when charging or >60% battery
  - Balanced mode: Default operation (30-60% battery)
  - Power saver: Reduced scanning when <30% battery
  - Ultra-low power: Emergency mode when <10% battery
- **Background efficiency**: Automatic power saving when app backgrounded
- **Configurable scanning**: Duty cycle adapts to battery state

### Network Efficiency

- **Optimized Bloom filters**: Faster duplicate detection with less memory
- **Message aggregation**: Batches small messages to reduce transmissions
- **Adaptive connection limits**: Adjusts peer connections based on power mode

## Technical Architecture

### Binary Protocol

bitchat uses an efficient binary protocol optimized for Bluetooth LE:

- Compact packet format with 1-byte type field
- TTL-based message routing (max 7 hops)
- Automatic fragmentation for large messages
- Message deduplication via unique IDs

### Mesh Networking

- Each device acts as both client and peripheral
- Automatic peer discovery and connection management
- Store-and-forward for offline message delivery
- Adaptive duty cycling for battery optimization

### Android-Specific Optimizations

- **Coroutine Architecture**: Asynchronous operations for mesh networking
- **Kotlin Coroutines**: Thread-safe concurrent mesh operations
- **EncryptedSharedPreferences**: Secure storage for user settings
- **Lifecycle-Aware**: Proper handling of Android app lifecycle
- **Battery Optimization**: Foreground service and adaptive scanning

## Android Technical Architecture

### Core Components

1. **BitchatApplication.kt**: Application-level initialization and dependency injection
2. **MainActivity.kt**: Main activity handling permissions and UI hosting
3. **ChatViewModel.kt**: MVVM pattern managing app state and business logic
4. **BluetoothMeshService.kt**: Core BLE mesh networking (central + peripheral roles)
5. **EncryptionService.kt**: Cryptographic operations using BouncyCastle
6. **BinaryProtocol.kt**: Binary packet encoding/decoding matching iOS format
7. **ChatScreen.kt**: Jetpack Compose UI with Material Design 3

### Dependencies

- **Jetpack Compose**: Modern declarative UI
- **BouncyCastle**: Cryptographic operations (X25519, Ed25519, AES-GCM)
- **Nordic BLE Library**: Reliable Bluetooth LE operations
- **Kotlin Coroutines**: Asynchronous programming
- **LZ4**: Message compression (when enabled)
- **EncryptedSharedPreferences**: Secure local storage

### Binary Protocol Compatibility

The Android implementation maintains 100% binary protocol compatibility with iOS:

- **Header Format**: Identical 13-byte header structure
- **Packet Types**: Same message types and routing logic
- **Encryption**: Identical cryptographic algorithms and key exchange
- **UUIDs**: Same Bluetooth service and characteristic identifiers
- **Fragmentation**: Compatible message fragmentation for large content

## Publishing to Google Play

### Preparation

1. **Update version information:**

   ```kotlin
   // In app/build.gradle.kts
   defaultConfig {
       versionCode = 2  // Increment for each release
       versionName = "1.1.0"  // User-visible version
   }
   ```

2. **Create a signed release build:**

   ```bash
   ./gradlew assembleRelease
   ```

3. **Generate app bundle (recommended for Play Store):**
   ```bash
   ./gradlew bundleRelease
   ```

### Play Store Requirements

- **Target API**: Latest Android API (currently 34)
- **Privacy Policy**: Required for apps requesting sensitive permissions
- **App Permissions**: Justify Bluetooth and location usage
- **Content Rating**: Complete questionnaire for age-appropriate content

### Distribution

- **Google Play Store**: Main distribution channel
- **F-Droid**: For open-source distribution
- **Direct APK**: For testing and development

## Cross-Platform Communication

This Android port enables seamless communication with the original iOS bitchat app:

- **iPhone ↔ Android**: Full bidirectional messaging
- **Mixed Groups**: iOS and Android users in same channels
- **Feature Parity**: All commands and encryption work across platforms
- **Protocol Sync**: Identical message format and routing behavior

**iOS Version**: For iPhone/iPad users, get the original bitchat at [github.com/jackjackbits/bitchat](https://github.com/jackjackbits/bitchat)

## Contributing

Contributions are welcome! Key areas for enhancement:

1. **Performance**: Battery optimization and connection reliability
2. **UI/UX**: Additional Material Design 3 features
3. **Security**: Enhanced cryptographic features
4. **Testing**: Unit and integration test coverage
5. **Documentation**: API documentation and development guides

## Support & Issues

- **Bug Reports**: [Create an issue](../../issues) with device info and logs
- **Feature Requests**: [Start a discussion](https://github.com/orgs/permissionlesstech/discussions)
- **Security Issues**: Email security concerns privately
- **iOS Compatibility**: Cross-reference with [original iOS repo](https://github.com/jackjackbits/bitchat)

For iOS-specific issues, please refer to the [original iOS bitchat repository](https://github.com/jackjackbits/bitchat).

Commit message:

Revise README for Gap Mesh project
Updated references from 'Bitchat' to 'Gap Mesh' and modified installation instructions accordingly.

README.md, after:

![qr code](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/darabo/gap-android/refs/heads/main/IMG_6338.jpeg)

## Gap Mesh

A fork of Bitchat for the needs of Iranians. Includes optimizations and other enhancements. 

# bitchat for Android

A secure, decentralized, peer-to-peer messaging app that works over Bluetooth mesh networks. No internet required for mesh chats, no servers, no phone numbers - just pure encrypted communication. Bitchat also supports geohash channels, which use an internet connection to connect you with others in your geographic area.

This is the **Android port** of the original [Gap Mesh iOS app](https://github.com/darabo/gapmesh-ios), maintaining 100% protocol compatibility for cross-platform communication.

## Install bitchat

You can download the latest version of Gap Mesh for Android from the [GitHub Releases page](https://github.com/permissionlesstech/darabo/gap-android/releases).


**Instructions:**

1.  **Download the APK:** On your Android device, navigate to the link above and download the latest `.apk` file. Open it.
2.  **Allow Unknown Sources:** On some devices, before you can install the APK, you may need to enable "Install from unknown sources" in your device's settings. This is typically found under **Settings > Security** or **Settings > Apps & notifications > Special app access**.
3.  **Install:** Open the downloaded `.apk` file to begin the installation.

## License

This project is released into the public domain. See the [LICENSE](LICENSE.md) file for details.

## 📖 User Guides

New to Gap Mesh? Start here:

- 🇺🇸 **[English User Guide](docs/USER_GUIDE_EN.md)** – Complete guide for beginners
- 🇮🇷 **[راهنمای فارسی](docs/USER_GUIDE_FA.md)** – راهنمای کامل به زبان فارسی

## Features

- **✅ Cross-Platform Compatible**: Full protocol compatibility with iOS bitchat
- **✅ Decentralized Mesh Network**: Automatic peer discovery and multi-hop message relay over Bluetooth LE
- **✅ End-to-End Encryption**: X25519 key exchange + AES-256-GCM for private messages
- **✅ Channel-Based Chats**: Topic-based group messaging with optional password protection
- **✅ Store & Forward**: Messages cached for offline peers and delivered when they reconnect
- **✅ Privacy First**: No accounts, no phone numbers, no persistent identifiers
- **✅ IRC-Style Commands**: Familiar `/join`, `/msg`, `/who` style interface
- **✅ Message Retention**: Optional channel-wide message saving controlled by channel owners
- **✅ Emergency Wipe**: Triple-tap logo to instantly clear all data
- **✅ Modern Android UI**: Jetpack Compose with Material Design 3
- **✅ Dark/Light Themes**: Terminal-inspired aesthetic matching iOS version
- **✅ Battery Optimization**: Adaptive scanning and power management

## Android Setup

### Prerequisites

- **Android Studio**: Arctic Fox (2020.3.1) or newer
- **Android SDK**: API level 26 (Android 8.0) or higher
- **Kotlin**: 1.8.0 or newer
- **Gradle**: 7.0 or newer

### Build Instructions

1. **Clone the repository:**

   ```bash
   git clone https://github.com/permissionlesstech/bitchat-android.git
   cd bitchat-android
   ```

2. **Open in Android Studio:**

   ```bash
   # Open Android Studio and select "Open an Existing Project"
   # Navigate to the bitchat-android directory
   ```

3. **Build the project:**

   ```bash
   ./gradlew build
   ```

4. **Install on device:**
   ```bash
   ./gradlew installDebug
   ```

### Development Build

For development builds with debugging enabled:

```bash
./gradlew assembleDebug
adb install -r app/build/outputs/apk/debug/app-debug.apk
```

### Release Build

For production releases:

```bash
./gradlew assembleRelease
```

## Android-Specific Requirements

### Permissions

The app requires the following permissions (automatically requested):

- **Bluetooth**: Core BLE functionality
- **Location**: Required for BLE scanning on Android
- **Network**: Expand your mesh through public internet relays
- **Notifications**: Message alerts and background updates

### Hardware Requirements

- **Bluetooth LE (BLE)**: Required for mesh networking
- **Android 8.0+**: API level 26 minimum
- **RAM**: 2GB recommended for optimal performance

## Usage

### Basic Commands

- `/j #channel` - Join or create a channel
- `/m @name message` - Send a private message
- `/w` - List online users
- `/channels` - Show all discovered channels
- `/block @name` - Block a peer from messaging you
- `/block` - List all blocked peers
- `/unblock @name` - Unblock a peer
- `/clear` - Clear chat messages
- `/pass [password]` - Set/change channel password (owner only)
- `/transfer @name` - Transfer channel ownership
- `/save` - Toggle message retention for channel (owner only)

### Getting Started

1. **Install the app** on your Android device (requires Android 8.0+)
2. **Grant permissions** for Bluetooth and location when prompted
3. **Launch bitchat** - it will auto-start mesh networking
4. **Set your nickname** or use the auto-generated one
5. **Connect automatically** to nearby iOS and Android bitchat users
6. **Join a channel** with `/j #general` or start chatting in public
7. **Messages relay** through the mesh network to reach distant peers

### Android UI Features

- **Jetpack Compose UI**: Modern Material Design 3 interface
- **Dark/Light Themes**: Terminal-inspired aesthetic matching iOS
- **Haptic Feedback**: Vibrations for interactions and notifications
- **Adaptive Layout**: Optimized for various Android screen sizes
- **Message Status**: Real-time delivery and read receipts
- **RSSI Indicators**: Signal strength colors for each peer

### Channel Features

- **Password Protection**: Channel owners can set passwords with `/pass`
- **Message Retention**: Owners can enable mandatory message saving with `/save`
- **@ Mentions**: Use `@nickname` to mention users (with autocomplete)
- **Ownership Transfer**: Pass control to trusted users with `/transfer`

## Security & Privacy

### Encryption

- **Private Messages**: X25519 key exchange + AES-256-GCM encryption
- **Channel Messages**: Argon2id password derivation + AES-256-GCM
- **Digital Signatures**: Ed25519 for message authenticity
- **Forward Secrecy**: New key pairs generated each session

### Privacy Features

- **No Registration**: No accounts, emails, or phone numbers required
- **Ephemeral by Default**: Messages exist only in device memory
- **Cover Traffic**: Random delays and dummy messages prevent traffic analysis
- **Emergency Wipe**: Triple-tap logo to instantly clear all data
- **Bundled Tor Support**: Built-in Tor network integration for enhanced privacy when internet connectivity is available

## Performance & Efficiency

### Message Compression

- **LZ4 Compression**: Automatic compression for messages >100 bytes
- **30-70% bandwidth savings** on typical text messages
- **Smart compression**: Skips already-compressed data

### Battery Optimization

- **Adaptive Power Modes**: Automatically adjusts based on battery level
  - Performance mode: Full features when charging or >60% battery
  - Balanced mode: Default operation (30-60% battery)
  - Power saver: Reduced scanning when <30% battery
  - Ultra-low power: Emergency mode when <10% battery
- **Background efficiency**: Automatic power saving when app backgrounded
- **Configurable scanning**: Duty cycle adapts to battery state

### Network Efficiency

- **Optimized Bloom filters**: Faster duplicate detection with less memory
- **Message aggregation**: Batches small messages to reduce transmissions
- **Adaptive connection limits**: Adjusts peer connections based on power mode

## Technical Architecture

### Binary Protocol

bitchat uses an efficient binary protocol optimized for Bluetooth LE:

- Compact packet format with 1-byte type field
- TTL-based message routing (max 7 hops)
- Automatic fragmentation for large messages
- Message deduplication via unique IDs

### Mesh Networking

- Each device acts as both client and peripheral
- Automatic peer discovery and connection management
- Store-and-forward for offline message delivery
- Adaptive duty cycling for battery optimization

### Android-Specific Optimizations

- **Coroutine Architecture**: Asynchronous operations for mesh networking
- **Kotlin Coroutines**: Thread-safe concurrent mesh operations
- **EncryptedSharedPreferences**: Secure storage for user settings
- **Lifecycle-Aware**: Proper handling of Android app lifecycle
- **Battery Optimization**: Foreground service and adaptive scanning

## Android Technical Architecture

### Core Components

1. **BitchatApplication.kt**: Application-level initialization and dependency injection
2. **MainActivity.kt**: Main activity handling permissions and UI hosting
3. **ChatViewModel.kt**: MVVM pattern managing app state and business logic
4. **BluetoothMeshService.kt**: Core BLE mesh networking (central + peripheral roles)
5. **EncryptionService.kt**: Cryptographic operations using BouncyCastle
6. **BinaryProtocol.kt**: Binary packet encoding/decoding matching iOS format
7. **ChatScreen.kt**: Jetpack Compose UI with Material Design 3

### Dependencies

- **Jetpack Compose**: Modern declarative UI
- **BouncyCastle**: Cryptographic operations (X25519, Ed25519, AES-GCM)
- **Nordic BLE Library**: Reliable Bluetooth LE operations
- **Kotlin Coroutines**: Asynchronous programming
- **LZ4**: Message compression (when enabled)
- **EncryptedSharedPreferences**: Secure local storage

### Binary Protocol Compatibility

The Android implementation maintains 100% binary protocol compatibility with iOS:

- **Header Format**: Identical 13-byte header structure
- **Packet Types**: Same message types and routing logic
- **Encryption**: Identical cryptographic algorithms and key exchange
- **UUIDs**: Same Bluetooth service and characteristic identifiers
- **Fragmentation**: Compatible message fragmentation for large content

## Publishing to Google Play

### Preparation

1. **Update version information:**

   ```kotlin
   // In app/build.gradle.kts
   defaultConfig {
       versionCode = 2  // Increment for each release
       versionName = "1.1.0"  // User-visible version
   }
   ```

2. **Create a signed release build:**

   ```bash
   ./gradlew assembleRelease
   ```

3. **Generate app bundle (recommended for Play Store):**
   ```bash
   ./gradlew bundleRelease
   ```

### Play Store Requirements

- **Target API**: Latest Android API (currently 34)
- **Privacy Policy**: Required for apps requesting sensitive permissions
- **App Permissions**: Justify Bluetooth and location usage
- **Content Rating**: Complete questionnaire for age-appropriate content

### Distribution

- **Google Play Store**: Main distribution channel
- **F-Droid**: For open-source distribution
- **Direct APK**: For testing and development

## Cross-Platform Communication

This Android port enables seamless communication with the original iOS bitchat app:

- **iPhone ↔ Android**: Full bidirectional messaging
- **Mixed Groups**: iOS and Android users in same channels
- **Feature Parity**: All commands and encryption work across platforms
- **Protocol Sync**: Identical message format and routing behavior

**iOS Version**: For iPhone/iPad users, get the original bitchat at [github.com/jackjackbits/bitchat](https://github.com/jackjackbits/bitchat)

## Contributing

Contributions are welcome! Key areas for enhancement:

1. **Performance**: Battery optimization and connection reliability
2. **UI/UX**: Additional Material Design 3 features
3. **Security**: Enhanced cryptographic features
4. **Testing**: Unit and integration test coverage
5. **Documentation**: API documentation and development guides

## Support & Issues

- **Bug Reports**: [Create an issue](../../issues) with device info and logs
- **Feature Requests**: [Start a discussion](https://github.com/orgs/permissionlesstech/discussions)
- **Security Issues**: Email security concerns privately
- **iOS Compatibility**: Cross-reference with [original iOS repo](https://github.com/jackjackbits/bitchat)

For iOS-specific issues, please refer to the [original iOS bitchat repository](https://github.com/jackjackbits/bitchat).
